article source: 2023 © MaoHuPi
Extraction, Distillation and Thin Layer Chromatography
2023/02/13 MaoHuPi
forecast
Purpose
Learn and look closely at three methods for separating mixtures in the lab and understand when to apply them.
Experimental principle
Extraction: The purpose of separation is achieved by using the difference in solubility of a specific solute in two immiscible solvents. In this experiment, the pigments in tomato paste, including carotene and lycopene, are all fat-soluble, and their solubility in edible oil is much higher than that of water, so these pigments can be extracted into edible oil by using a separatory funnel.
Distillation: Use the difference in the boiling point of each substance in the mixture to achieve the purpose of separation. Usually, the purpose of distillation is to obtain low-boiling component substances. For example: in the ink used in this experiment, the boiling point of the pigment is obviously higher than that of water, so when the ink is heated, the water with a low boiling point will evaporate and then be condensed to precipitate out, while the pigment with a high boiling point will remain in the distillation bottle.
Chromatographic analysis by thin layer chromatography:
Thin-layer chromatography slides are made of bauxite or silica gel mixed with mud and smeared on clean glass slides, plastic sheets or aluminum sheets, with a thickness of about 0.25mm. After drying, use the capillary to lightly spot the mixture to be separated on the bottom of the TLC slice, the smaller the spot, the better the separation effect. Then put the TLC slice into the container containing the developing solution, and the developing solution, due to capillary action, dissolves the mixture through the small dots and rises together. The mixture has different adsorption force to the thin layer, so the rising rate of each component is different, so the effect of separation can be achieved. If the components of the mixture are colored, they can be distinguished with the naked eye; if they are colorless, they can be distinguished by physical or chemical methods.
Commercially available inks are made by mixing and adjusting pigments of different colors in order to achieve vivid colors and precise chroma. Pigments of different colors can be easily observed with the naked eye after being developed by chromatography because of their differences in composition characteristics.
equipment
name / specification
quantity
name / specification
quantity
Aluminum foil (about 20cm long x 20cm wide)
1 piece
TLC sheet (7cm long x 1cm wide)
1 piece
Beaker (50ml)
2
Beaker (100ml)
1
Graduated Cylinder (10ml)
1
Glass capillary for TLC slices
1 stick
Graduated Cylinder (25ml)
1
Ruler (15 cm)
1 stick
Graduated Cylinder (200ml)
1
Iron frame (with iron clip)
3 groups
Glass rod
1 stick
ceramic fiber mesh
1 piece
Separating funnel
1
tweezers
1 stick
funnel
3
Distillation unit
Group 1
heating pack
1
Zeolite
Several
drug
drug
serving size
characteristic
blue ink
15ml
Can be used for printing and painting.
Before use, confirm the cleanliness of the surface of the loaded object, and avoid mixing inks of different colors, which will affect the experimental results.
distilled water
50ml
Distilled water filters out suspended solids through distillation and needs to be replaced regularly to prevent contamination.
cooking oil
20ml
It is a liquid food produced by processing vegetable oil and animal oil as raw materials.
Isopropanol
5ml
A powerful disinfectant that can be used to disinfect surfaces such as utensils, hygiene products, and skin. It is a highly flammable liquid and vapor, and the container should be placed in a well-ventilated place away from ignition sources and where static electricity is not easily generated, and avoid contact with eyes, otherwise it may cause severe irritation.
ethanol
5ml
Also known as alcohol, it is often used in cooking or as a cleaning agent. It is a highly flammable liquid and vapour, keep container tightly covered and keep away from ignition sources. In case of contact with eyes, wash immediately with plenty of water and consult a medical practitioner.
ketchup
10 grams
Condiment made with tomatoes. The lycopene in tomato is oil-soluble but not water-soluble, so it can be extracted through edible oil.
Experimental procedure
extraction
00000052
Weigh 10 grams of tomato in a 50 ml beaker, add 20 ml of distilled water, and stir with a glass rod to mix evenly.
00000054
In another 50ml beaker, add 20ml cooking oil.
Try to choose colorless or lighter edible oil.
00000057
Pour the tomato paste solution and cooking oil into a clean separatory funnel in sequence, plug the glass stopper tightly, shake the separatory funnel for about one minute, and then place it on the iron rack.
00000059
Observe whether the color of the cooking oil in the upper layer changes? How does the color change?
to distill
0000005C
Measure 10ml of blue ink, add 140ml of distilled water to mix and dilute.
0000005E
Carefully pour the diluted ink solution into the distillation bottle, and then complete the connection of distillation devices such as the distillation bottle, condenser tube and thermometer, and fix them with iron frames and iron clips.
The heating plate in the picture is only used for raising the height and can be replaced by other equipment. A heating pack can be replaced by a Bunsen burner (or alcohol burner), a tripod, and a ceramic fiber mesh.
00000061
Turn on the water injection faucet, make sure that the water in the condensation pipe is in a state of migratory flow, and turn on the heating package to heat. Observe the color of the distillate. When the collected residue is about 10 ml, turn off the heat source and water source.
TLC analysis
00000064
Take a 7 cm x 1 cm TLC sheet, draw a line 0.7 cm from the bottom, and draw a line 0.3 cm from the top; if using filter paper, draw a line 1 cm from the bottom and top.
The outer edge of the cut TLC slide is sharp, so be careful when handling it to avoid cutting your fingers, and do not touch the white coating to avoid contamination.
00000067
Use a capillary to dip the blue ink at the midpoint of the bottom line, the smaller the better, dot the same spot 2 or 3 times until the color of the sample is dark enough.
00000069
Mix ethanol and isopropanol to prepare 5ml of developing solution in appropriate proportion, pour it into a 100ml beaker, and carefully stand up the TLC slice completed in the steps in the beaker with tweezers, and pay attention not to soak the developing solution into the sample point. After sealing the beaker with aluminum foil, wait for the developing solution to rise to the line drawn on the top.
0000006B
Pick up the edge of the TLC slice with tweezers, take it out carefully, and observe whether the color spots of different colors are separated.
waste disposal
name
type
Approach
tomato paste and cooking oil
liquid waste
down the sink
ink solution
liquid waste
down the sink
TLC film
Solid Waste
After concentration, it will be handed over to the teacher for processing
Developing solution for chromatography experiments
liquid waste
After concentration, it will be handed over to the teacher for processing
report
Experimental results
extraction
After letting the mixture of iodine solution, distilled water and n-hexane stand for 8 minutes 25.4 seconds, you can see that the color in the separating funnel is divided into obvious upper and lower oranges, and the place closest to the bottom is It tends to be orange-yellow.
00000083
When the temperature measured by the thermometer at the mouth of the round-bottomed flask reached 99.2°C, transparent and colorless water began to flow out from the outlet of the condenser tube, while the blue pigment aqueous solution in the round-bottomed flask gradually darkened over time.
TLC
Twelve minutes after the LTC test was put in, the developing solution reached the finish line, and the colors on the LTC sheet became three color points of "orange", "yellow" and "pink" from top to bottom.
Questions and Discussions
How to tell if the extraction experiment was successful? What color will the cooking oil layer be?
During the extraction, the oil layer and the water layer should be clearly separated. If the oil layer has been separated at this time, it means that the extraction has been successful. The edible oil layer will appear orange-red.
When the distilled liquid drips out in large quantities, what is the speed displayed on the thermometer?
The temperature displayed on the thermometer should be close to the boiling point of water 100°C
How many color points can be observed on the TLC slice? What are the colors?
Two obvious color points can be observed on TLC slices, namely dark blue and light purple.
Why should the developing solution not exceed the starting point?
Because if the developing solution exceeds the starting point, it may cause the color point to dissolve directly into the developing solution at the bottom of the cup instead of moving upward through capillary phenomenon as we expect.
It is recommended to point the sample 2~3 times with the capillary. If the concentration is too low, what are the disadvantages? What are the disadvantages of being too high?
If the concentration is too low, the color of the sample spots on the TLC developing film will not be obvious, and the separation of the samples cannot be clearly observed; if the concentration is too high, it may smear around when the developing solution passes through, affecting the experimental results.
Think about it, what mixtures in life are suitable for separation by the method introduced in this experiment?
Extraction: Extract the chlorophyll in the plant cytoplasm with alcohol.
Distillation: Separating low-concentration alcohol to make it more concentrated.
TLC analysis: analyze the components of plant extracts (chlorophyll, lutein, carotene, etc.).
If there are metal ions dissolved in the aqueous solution, such as Zn²⁺ or Cu²⁺, etc., is there any way to separate them?
Separation is carried out by electroplating with graphite rods on both positive and negative electrodes.
Experimental experience
Due to time constraints, the experiment was carried out in the order of distillation, extraction, and thin-layer chromatography this time. In the re-distillation experiment, in addition to being extra careful not to squeeze the glass too hard when disassembling and connecting the equipment, after the rubber tubes at both ends of the condenser pipe circulate, the rubber tubes should not be bent sharply, otherwise the tap water will be bent. When using it, the whole set of equipment will vibrate greatly, the rubber tube will fall off, and even the glass will break due to repeated "accumulation and release". When doing thin-layer chromatography, the starting line was drawn too vigorously at the beginning, almost directly scratching off the layer of the TLC film.